>> The ancient teachings say
that meditation is being with
reality as it is.
One thing you can't deny is
that there is the experience
of a body here breathing.
So we can use that as
the starting point.
We use the breath to anchor
us in the now in what's real.
The breath can guide us out
of the labyrinth of the mind
to the present moment.
To start, we will
simply focus on the air
moving through the nose.
Put your attention on your
nose and just experience
the air going in and out.
When you are
breathing in, notice
that you're breathing in.
When you're
breathing out, notice
that you're breathing out.
Let the breath be natural.
Don't control it in any way.
Let the intelligence of
the body move the breath.
We are going to be
aware of this one thing
in order to develop
concentration.
We are going to feel
the sensations moving
through the nose and the
nostrils, whatever sensations
are there.
There might be a tingling
sensation, a feeling of heat,
of coolness, a pressure, a
feeling of the air flowing.
Just observe whatever is there.
Thoughts may come up and
interfere with your meditation
in many ways.
Thoughts may come, but we
are going to consciously
let go of any interest
in them to avoid
getting lost in the stories
of the past and future.
If your attention goes
to some internal dialogue
or mental images, simply
return back to the breath
and be aware that the thoughts
may try to continually hook
your attention.
Keep observing the breath
single pointedly, the air
moving in and out of the nose.
Allow it to anchor
your attention.
It's important to understand
that the mind doesn't
need to stop its activity.
You don't need to suppress or
try to make the mind blank.
You simply become
disinterested in it.
The more fully our
attention is held
with the experience
of the breath,
the less it is
going to be caught
in the mind or other
sensory distractions.
The mind will come up
with all kinds of ways
to divert your attention.
Stay alert and vigilant.
Don't get caught in the thoughts
and don't push them away.
This is the middle way.
Let everything be as it is.
Don't control or manipulate
your thoughts in any way.
If you try to manipulate
your thoughts,
then you're trying
to achieve something.
This is just another idea,
just another thought.
Your meditation will
become a battle.
And the only one you're
fighting is yourself.
Give up all interest
in thoughts.
Give up trying to achieve
anything and abide
with the breath, being
thoughtlessly aware,
watching the breath.
It's blissful.
It's peaceful if you drop
your inner resistance.
Meditation is simply letting
everything be as it is.
Wait for the next breath
to arrive on its own.
Don't take the next breath.
Let the breath take you.
When you let go of
control of the breath,
there may be a bit of fear.
You may have an impulse
to take a deep breath.
Trust the body.
Trust that it knows
how to breathe.
There's nothing to do
in this meditation other
than observe the breath.
It may become obvious what
the mind is already doing.
It's constantly
generating thoughts.
But you keep coming
back to the breath.
Stay in the now.
If sensations arise
elsewhere in the body,
pleasant, unpleasant, or
neutral, ignore them for now.
Limit awareness to the
sensations in the nose.
The mind will sometimes wander.
That's OK.
All of the sudden, you
might be lost in a thought.
The moment you
remember, you come back
into the present moment, back to
the breath, back to the breath,
back to the breath.
This is the practice.
Don't get frustrated.
You can just smile
at the situation.
This is the human situation,
the human condition.
The mind is very undisciplined.
The longer you sit in
presence without moving,
without reacting, the
more intense sensations
may arise and offer
the possibility
of deeper purification.
Now I will stop talking
so you can sit in silence.
[GONG CHIMING]